# Mesh Skill 

## Overview

The **mesh** package implements a ROS 2 skill using an action-based interface.
It is designed as a modular component that can be triggered via an action client and extended with custom logic.

This node reconstructs a mesh from a point cloud. It also generates a coherent set of normals alongside the mesh.

The primary use case is surface reconstruction from point clouds generated by 3D scanners. 
The resulting mesh can be used for visualization or integrated into more complex pipelines.

---

## Requirements

* ROS 2 
* Python 3
* `colcon` build system

The expected input is a colored point cloud without normals, in PLY format. 
This type of point cloud can be generated using a 3D scanner, a 3D camera, or various 3D algorithms. 
Other file formats containing point clouds can be easily converted to PLY using open-source software and libraries. 
In Python, both Open3D and Trimesh are well-suited for this task.


### Ros dependencies

All required ROS dependencies are declared in the two `package.xml` files.

### Python dependencies

| Package | Version |
|---|---|
| `open3d` | `0.19.0` | 
| `numpy` | `1.26.4` | 
---

## Build the Package

Source your ROS 2 environment and build the workspace:

```bash
source /opt/ros/<your ros2 version>/setup.bash
cd <your_workspace>
colcon build
source install/setup.bash
```

---

## Run the Skill

Launch the skill using:

```bash
ros2 launch mesh mesh.launch.py
```

Expected Output:

```text
Initialising...
Skill mesh started, but not yet configured.
Skill mesh configuration started.
Skill mesh is configured, but not yet active.
Skill mesh is active and running.
Skill mesh: performing background task...
```

---

## Architecture

The skill is implemented as:

* A ROS 2 node (lifecycle-based)
* An action server (default name: `mesh_reference`)
* A background execution loop

Main logic is located in:

```
mesh/skill_impl.py
```

---

## Mesh Reconstruction Requirements

### Parameters

The following parameters are part of the **custom action interface** `mesh_skill_msgs/action/Mesh`:

- **scan_id** (`string`)  
  Uniquely identifies the object for which the mesh should be generated.


- **result** (`int64`)  
  Represents the execution result, allowing different success or failure states.

---

### Input Data Structure

The skill expects the following directory structure:

```
<DATA_DIR>/
└── <scan_id>/
    └── pcl.ply
```

* `<DATA_DIR>`: base directory defined in your code
* `<scan_id>`: unique identifier passed to the skill
* `pcl.ply`: input point cloud file

Example:

```
data/
└── 001/
    └── pcl.ply
```

Input: The input is a standard colored point cloud in PLY format.
Testing: The reconstruction method has been tested on point clouds with an average of 1M points and a maximum of approximately 3M points.
Optimization: The parameters and settings are optimized for reconstructing point clouds with a radius of approximately 150 units (The PLY file format does not explicitly store measurement units).
Customization: The MOLT parameter can be adjusted if the point cloud being reconstructed differs significantly in scale.

---

### Output Files

The skill will generate the following files inside the same folder:

```
<DATA_DIR>/<scan_id>/
├── mesh_<scan_id>.ply
└── mesh_<scan_id>_double.ply
```

*   **Single-sided mesh:**`mesh_<scan_id>.ply` Normals point outward from the object where possible.
*   **Double-sided mesh:** `mesh_<scan_id>_double.ply` Supports two-sided rendering.

These two reconstruction types are designed for different use cases and rendering pipelines: 

Double-sided mesh: Recommended when normals are required for both faces (for example when calculating cobot toolpaths for both sides of the mesh).
Single-sided mesh: Provides a more lightweight alternative when only the external surface is of interest.

---

## Testing the skill

You can test the skill using a simple ROS 2 action client.

### Example Action Client

```python
import rclpy
from rclpy.action import ActionClient
from rclpy.node import Node

from mesh_skill_msgs.action import Mesh


class Act_cli(Node):

    def __init__(self):
        super().__init__('act_cli')
        self._action_client = ActionClient(self, Mesh, 'mesh_reference')

    def send_goal(self):
        goal_msg = Mesh.Goal()
        goal_msg.scan_id = "<your id>"

        # Waiting server
        if not self._action_client.wait_for_server(timeout_sec=5.0):
            self.get_logger().error('Server not ready!')
            return

        # Send goal
        self.get_logger().info('Goal sent')
        self._send_goal_future = self._action_client.send_goal_async(goal_msg)
        rclpy.spin_until_future_complete(self, self._send_goal_future)  
        self.goal_response_callback(self._send_goal_future)




    def goal_response_callback(self, future):
        goal_handle = future.result()
        if not goal_handle.accepted:
            self.get_logger().info('Goal rejected')
            return

        self.get_logger().info('Goal accepted')

        self._get_result_future = goal_handle.get_result_async()
        self._get_result_future.add_done_callback(self.get_result_callback)

    def get_result_callback(self, future):
        result = future.result().result
        self.get_logger().info('Result: '+ str(result.result))
        rclpy.shutdown()


def main(args=None):
    rclpy.init(args=args)

    action_client = Act_cli()
    action_client.send_goal()
    rclpy.spin(action_client)


if __name__ == '__main__':
    main()
```

Expected Output:

```text
Goal sent
Goal accepted

```

---

## Important Notes

* The action name (`mesh_reference`) must match between:

  * Action server (in `skill_impl.py`)
  * Action client

* After modifying messages (`mesh_skill_msgs`), rebuild the workspace:

  ```bash
  colcon build
  source install/setup.bash
  ```

---

## Customization

### Modify Skill Logic

Edit:

```
mesh/skill_impl.py
```

This file controls:

* Goal handling
* Execution logic
* Returned results

---

### Modify Action Interface

Edit the action definition:

```
mesh_skill_msgs/action/Mesh.action
```

You can customize:

* Goal fields (input)
* Result fields (output)
* Feedback messages

---

### Change Action Name

If needed, update the action name:

* In the server (`skill_impl.py`)
* In the client (`mesh_reference` → your custom name)

---

## Common failure cases

Common failures are mainly related to:

*   **Input file issues**
    *   Wrong format
    *   Corrupted input
    *   Missing input file
*   **Point cloud too noisy for algorithm convergence**
    *   Multiple scans not correctly aligned
*   **Wrong scale**
    *   Possible fixes: adjust algorithm parameters or rescale the point cloud
*   **Memory saturation**
    *   Usually fixed by adding swap memory


To mitigate potential algorithmic failures and manage computational resources, the following parameters can be tuned:

* depth: Higher values allow for the reconstruction of more complex shapes. Lower values reduce computational overhead and memory usage.
* target_triangles: Acts as a threshold to prevent memory exhaustion.

All errors are logged during execution. For detailed information regarding specific error types, please refer to the Open3D documentation.
